== Clinical development of a recombinant ==

= BibTex =

= Summary =

= Notes =

pp. 4466
The goal of any clinical development program is to evaluate vaccine safety,
immunogenicty, and efficacy to support product licensure. The requirements for
licensure typically include an adequate safety database, demonstration of
manufacturing consistency, and demonstration of clinical benefit.

pp. 4466
Demonstration of clinical benefit is the challenging component for diseases such
as Ebola where outbreaks are sporadic and difficult if not impossible to
predict, and often in settings where there is not sufficient infrastructure to
conduct a trial to regulatory standards.

pp. 4468
The study located cases of Ebola ("index cases") and then identified "rings" or
clusters of subjects who came into contact with the "index case," or were
contacts of those contacts. The rings were randomized to the immediate arm or
the delayed arm where vaccination occurred on Day 0 or Day 21 respectively.

pp. 4469
In summary, strong preclinical data, including evidence of protection after a
single immunization, postponed rVSVΔG-ZEBOV-GP to be an important vaccine
candidate for development in response to the most recent Ebola outbreaks.

pp. 4469
Cumulatively the data from clinical trials are expected to provide a solid body
of data supporting the safety and efficacy of the V920 vaccine and MSD is
committed to move this vaccine forward to licensure as quickly as possible and
to ensure vaccine availability for at-risk populations in advance of product
licensure.
