== Integrating Clinical Research into Epidemic Response: The Ebola Experience ==

= BibTex =

= Summary =

= Notes =

Assessment of vaccine trials

pp. 113
However, as with the design of the therapeutic trials, there were also
disagreements, competition , and infighting among the organizations that were
carrying out the trials... Most notably, while there was consensus that clinical
trial data would be necessary in order to support the licensure of any
investigational vaccine candidate, there was little agreement concerning the
preferred specific design or execution of the trials.

pp. 114
While determining the best designs for vaccine trials involved many of the same
issues complicating the design of therapeutic trials---randomization, community
perspectives, and access to the possible benefit---the vaccine trials also posed
distinct ethical issues.

pp. 114
First, a person receiving a vaccine would presumably not be infected with Ebola
and therefore not at immediate risk of death. Many of the arguments against
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) for Ebola therapeutics centered on the
ethics of giving an infected person a placebo or only standard of care when the
risk of death was so high without an effective intervention. The risk of adverse
effects from an unproven investigational agent were considered by some to be
smaller than the risks of not providing one.

pp. 114
Second, research participants who have received a vaccine or a placebo may
believe that they are protected from infection. They may not even consider the
possibility that they may have received the placebo or that even if they got the
vaccine it might not be effective, and, as a consequence, they may fail to take
all proscribed safety precautions, such as the proper downing and doffing pf
persona protective equipment while caring for Ebola patients.

pp. 115
However, some participants---particularly those from Medicins San Frontieres
(MSF)---disagreed and argued that, as with therapeutic agents, any vaccine trial
involving a placebo or active control arm would be unethical (Cohen and
Kupferschmidt, 2019b)

pp. 115
Randomization was seen as particularly problematic for health care workers, who
were at high risk of contracting Ebola.

pp. 115
... determining the choice of control arm proved to be one of the most
contentious points in designing Ebola vaccine trials. There were three main
options: a placebo control, an active vaccination (with a non-Ebola vaccine), or
delayed vaccination.

pp. 115
A stepped-wedge trial rolls out the intervention to participants over time,
either as individuals or in clusters. By the time the study ends, all
participants will have received the intervention, but they will have received it
in a random order and in some cases the intervention will have been delayed.

pp. 119
In an example of excellent communication, coordination, and a willingness to
compromise between researchers and public health officials, the study took
advantage of the public health contract training efforts implemented during the
outbreak.

pp. 119
Ring vaccination is a measure used to control the spread of an infection that
involves vaccinating individuals who are socially or geographically connected to
a known case, thereby creating a protective "ring" of immunity around affected
individuals to prevent further spread.

pp. 122
Not all of the scientists and ethicists involved in the conversations agreed
with this reasoning, yet to many it appeared to represent an acceptable
compromise between scientific rigor and the desire to offer the hoped for
benefits of the vaccine to as many as possible.

pp. 122
The study continued to enroll additional participants who were all offered
immediate immunization; the importance of this, going forward, meant that there
was no longer a control arm in the trial. (Henao-Restrepo et al, 2016)

pp. 122
However, given that only 21 days passed between the administration of the
vaccine to the immediate vaccination group and the delayed-vaccination control
group, there had to be a high enough risk in order for the study to show results
--- that is, if people in the delayed-vaccination group were not infected soon
enough to develop symptoms of Ebola within the 21-day delay period, it would be
difficult to show that the vaccine was effective.

pp. 122
The danger was that not enough events would occur within this window to permit
an assessment of vaccine efficacy, the essential goal of the study.

pp. 124
The lack of a placebo and the lack of blinding also raise concerns of possible
bias in the ascertainment of safety endpoints, which could have significantly
influenced the data presented. Additionally, if the study team was convinced
that the vaccine was effective, it might have been less intense to detect and
report events in the clusters randomized to immediate vaccination.

pp. 124
The DSMB action was based on the emerging evidence from the trial that the
vaccine was safe and effective as well as the reality that the numbers of new
ring-defining index cases was rapidly decreasing, which led the DSMB to conclude
that it "would be unethical to deny people access to this life-saving
intervention when the interim analysis showed evidence that rVSV-ZEBOV is both
safe and effective." (VF, 2015)

pp. 124
In the first publication the authors report, "The results of this interim
analysis indicate that rVSV-ZEBOV might be highly efficacious and safe in
preventing Ebola virus disease and is most likely effective at the population
level when delivered during an Ebola outbreak via a ring vaccination strategy."
(Henao-Restrepo et al, 2015, p. 857)

pp. l25
While the data indicate that this vaccine provides protection from Ebola, there
are differing estimates of the vaccines efficacy depending on the analytical
approach employed.

pp. l25
If all persons eligible for vaccination within each of the clusters were
included in the analysis, consistent with the intention-to-treat principle, the
trial was inconclusive (i.e., 7 of 3,212 eligible persons in immediate clusters
with a primary endpoint versus 16 of 3,075 in delayed clusters who were eligible
for vaccination and ascertainment of the primary endpoint, for a vaccine
effectiveness of 65 percent, 95% confidence interval, -47-91%).

pp. 125
When an "on-treatment" analysis was applied to those in the immediate
vaccination clusters who were actually vaccinated and this subset of
participants was compared to all eligible in the delayed vaccination clusters,
the trial results now showed statistically significant benefits...

pp. 128
Coverage in the press, however, focused on the statistically significant results
from the "on-treatment" analyses, which demonstrated 100 percent vaccine
efficacy.

pp. 128
However, which this "as-received" analysis is intended to measure vaccine
efficacy, it is likely to be a biased estimate of vaccine efficacy, as discussed
below. In contrast, the intention-to-treat analysis, which includes the entire
"as-assigned" group, provides an unbiased estimate of efficacy; in this case,
however, the estimate is substantially diluted due to the inclusion of those who
did not receive the vaccine although this is likely more representative of
overall clinical effectiveness.

pp. 128
We concur that, taken together, the results suggests that the vaccine most
likely provides some protection to recipients---possibly "substantial
protection," as stated in the final report. However, we remain uncertain about
the magnitude of its efficacy, which could in reality be quite low or even zero,
as the confidence limits around the unbiased estimate include zero.

pp. 128/129
The reason for this uncertainty is that the primary comparison reported by the
investigators is no longer protected by randomization because those who accepted
vaccination in the immediate clusters are being selected for inclusion
post-randomization. The main potential---bu unmeasured---bias of this approach
is that individuals who receive the vaccine may have had a lower chance of
organization of infection (e.g., different risk of exposure to the virus) then
those who were not immunized. If those who did not get the vaccine were more
likely to be exposed, then by excluding them from analysis but not excluding a
comparable subset from the group assigned to delayed vaccination we would bias
our results in favor of the immediate vaccination group. This is why the primary
analysis in any RCT, including a cluster-randomized RCT, is almost always
intention to treat, following the "one randomized, always analyzed" dictum.
(Hennekens et al., 1987)

pp. 129
Due to safety and logistical concerns no serologic data were collected during
the conduct of the trial so no immunological correlate of protection would
provide a benchmark, and other existing or newly designed vaccines could be
compared with the product used in the current study.

pp. 129
It was not possible to compile longer-time safety data comparing the vaccinated
and the control groups in the ring trial since all the control subjects were
vaccinated.

pp. 129
The "on treatment" vaccine efficacy estimate of 100 percent has been widely
reported, but the reports generally do not acknowledge the fact that no vaccine
is---or ever likely will be---100 percent effective, whether because of such
host factors as immunodeficiency states or immunogenetic based antigen
unresponsiveness or because of extrinsic factors such as a very high infection
inoculum size, which can overcome existing immunity. (CDC, n.d.)

pp. 130
Had the DSMB and the authors applied a more conservative interpolation of the
preliminary results, along the lines of what this committee thinks the data
demonstrates, and thereby continued to randomize all remaining clusters, the
power to demonstrate benefit would have increased.

pp. 130
That aside, the high level of expected protection, based on the trial results,
may make it more difficult to conduct a confirmatory controlled trial of
sufficient size in the event of a future outbreak; we can expect that it will be
considered unethical to deny the vaccine or delay its administration to any
individuals who are at risk of infection.

pp. 130
Additional benefit and risk assessments are important for refining the
indications for vaccine use during a future outbreak Ebola outbreak because the
risk-benefit determination may differ for those at high risk (contacts, health
care workers, burial teams) versus members of the general public who are at
considerably lower risk.

pp. 133
Additionally, given the collection of routine blood analysis and placebo design,
it allowed for easier detection of adverse effects of the vaccine. A downside,
however, is the larger sample size required when including an overall lower-risk
population.

pp. 137
There were several potential ethical issues with the trial, as acknowledged by
the study staff (Widdowson et al. 2016). First, the widespread fear of Ebola
could skew the risk-benefit calculation by health care and frontline workers and
push them toward accepting a vaccine of unknown safety and efficacy. Second,
participants were reimbursed for participation and received free health care,
which could have induced some to enroll.

pp. 139
Conducting Phase 1 and 2 trials in countries not affected by the outbreak was
thought to facilitate acceptance of longer trials in affected countries;
however, given the persistent belief in the affected countries that foreign
medical teams were possibly testing something dangerous it remained imperative
that trial teams also focus on community engagement and communication of the
clinical trial process.

pp. 139
The study designs selected were generally appropriate for the context and
question being explored---for example, implementing ring vaccination trials for
high-risk populations and individual RCTs for the general population at lower
risk in order to more fully assess safety.

pp. 140
The differences in the study designs and the value of the information generated
from each trial highlight the importance of collaboration in future trials. For
example, if the ring trial had been the only one conducted during the outbreak,
an unfortunate situation would have emerged; because of the initial suggestion
of its high degree of efficacy equipoise could have been preemptively eliminated
despite the estimate of protection from the intention-to-treat analysis being
much lower. Additionally, the results from the ring vaccination trial provide
limited safety data and no data on the duration of the immune response beyond 84
days...

pp. 140
In the event of a future outbreak, given the practical constraints on the
ground, it may be more strategic and easier in order to obtain initial
information on investigational vaccines.

pp. 141
There are also different scenarios in which the course of the outbreak and
interim trial results may influence the trial designs and, ultimately, vaccine
use during an outbreak. For example, during an epidemic with a new pathogen in
which the general population is at high risk of infection and a ring trial shows
initial efficacy, it may be reasonable to forgo planning a placebo-controlled
trial in order to vaccinate the entire population. Alternatively, it may be
preferable to move quickly to implement a placebo-controlled trial as an
epidemic begins to wane and it becomes clear that a ring trial may not give
definitive answers.

pp. 141
*Conclusion 4-1* _If research during future epidemics is to be conducted in a
more efficient and effective manner, funders and sponsors of research need to
plan well in advance, ideally during an inter-epidemic period, to coordinate
efforts more closely and must agree to initiate clinical research during an
outbreak in concordance with an overall research agenda.
