== Lancet Ebola vaccine criticism ==

= BibTex =

= Summary =

= Notes =

pp. 1933
In Guinea, the racing comes amid simmering criticisms that the so-called ring
vaccine trial run by WHO is not adequately protecting participants.

pp. 1933
But battling a high-profile US science project is only one of several issues
that the WHO trial faces. It is receiving criticism from anthropologists and
others in Guinea for how it protects volunteers who are vaccinated and develops
fever, a known side-effect of the Merck vaccine, and for its reliance on an
Ebola treatment center that might not be able to provide the level of care
required for clinical trial participants.

pp. 1933
Fever is a special problem for individuals who were possibly exposed to Ebola,
since fever in that situation is typically a reason to go to an Ebola treatment
center but could place an individual at high risk of exposure to the virus.

pp. 1934
But in Guinea, the strategy of relying on village chiefs is prone to failure
because of "mistrust towards all kinds of elites, including traditional chiefs
or elders," says anthropologist Fredric Le Maris of the Ecole Normale Superieure
de Lyon, who has worked in Guinea for 20 years.

pp. 1934
Gravis told _The Lancet_ that her concerns about the ring trial "are her
concerns about any trial which is conducted in an emergency," including ensuring
that trial volunteers "are followed up in a way that ensures their medical
care."

pp. 1934
He spoke to WHO investigators about what he'd seen and Kieny admits to hearing
"rumours" that treatment at Coyah "was not appropriate standard of care."

pp. 1934
Jim Loveny, a Toronto-based ethicist serving on the data safety monitoring board
for the trial the CDC is collaborating on in Sierra Leone, says that at that
board's weekly meetings, "everybody's biting their nails because we know so
little, really, cumulatively, about safety."

