ACE - angiotensin-converting enzyme
AIDS - acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
BPH - benign prostatic hypertrophy
BUN - blood urea nitrogen
CABG - coronary artery bypass graft
CAD - coronary artery disease
CBC - complete blood count
CF - cystic fibrosis
CHF - congestive heart failure
CKD - chronic kidney disease
COPD - chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CPAP - continuous positive airway pressure
CT - computed tomography
CVA - cerebrovascular accident
D&C - dilation and curettage
DIC - disseminated intravascular coagulation
DKA - diabetic ketoacidosis
DM - diabetes mellitus
DNA - deoxyribonucleic acid
DOE - dyspnea on exertion
DRE - digital rectal examination
DT - delirium tremens
DTR - deep tendon reflex
DVT - deep vein thrombosis
EBV - Epstein-Barr virus
EEG - electroencephalography
ELISA - enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EMG - electromyography
ESRD - end-stage renal disease
ETOH - ethyl alcohol
GERD - gastroesophageal reflux disease
GVHD - graft-versus-host disease
HAART - highly active antiretroviral therapy
HEENT - head, ears, eyes, nose, throat
Hgb - hemoglobin
HIPAA - Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HPV - human papillomavirus
HTN - hypertension
LFT - liver function test
LLQ - left lower quadrant
LUQ - left upper quadrant
LVAD - left ventricular assist device
MCH - mean corpuscular hemoglobin
MCHC - mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
MCV - mean corpuscular volume
MICU - medical intensive care unit
MODS - multiple organ dysfunction syndrome
MRI - magnetic resonance imaging
MSW - medical social worker
NICU - neonatal intensive care unit
NKA - no known allergies
NPO - nothing by mouth
NSAID - nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
OSA - obstructive sleep apnea
PALS - patient advice and liaison service
PEEP - positive end-expiratory pressure
PERRLA - pupils equal, round, reactive to light and accommodation
PET - positron emission tomography
PICU - pediatric intensive care unit
REM - rapid eye movement
ROS - review of symptoms
RRR - regular rate and rhythm
SAD - seasonal affective disorder
SIDS - sudden infant death syndrome
SOAP - subjective data, objective data, assessment, plan
SOB - shortness of breath
ROM - range of motion
TENS - transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulator
URI - upper respiratory infection
UTI - urinary tract infection
WNL = within normal limits


cancerous - carcino
clotting - thrombo
cold - cryo
drug - chemo
eye - opthalmo
head - cehpalo
heart - cardio
kidney - nephro, reno
knowledge - gnoso
nerve - neuro
red - erythro
time - chrono
tumor - onco
urinary bladder - cysto, vesico
white - leuko
across or through - trans
after or behind - post
against - anti
back - postero, re, retro
bad, painful, difficult, or abnormal - dys, mal
before or forward - ante, pro, pros
behind - post, postero, re, retro
below, less than normal, or under - hypo, infra, sub
beside, near, along, or to the side of - para
between - inter
birth - nati
change or beyond - meta
complete or through - dia
development or nourishment - tropho
excessive, more than normal, or too much - hyper
fast - tachy
formation, growth, or development - plaso
gland - adeno
half - hemi
many or much - poly
new - neo
no or not - a, an
out or outside - ec, ecto, ex, exo, extra
self - aut
side - latero
slow - brady
surrounding - peri
to hold back - ischo
toward or near - ad
up or apart - ana
with or together - con, syn, sym
within - en, endo, intra

blood vessel - angio, vaso, vasculo
joint - arthro
plaque - arthero
vein - phlebo, veno
artery - arterio
cartilage - chondro
death of cells - necro
disease - noso, pathy
muscle - musculo, myoso, myo
sound - sono
sugar - glyco
abdomen - abdomino, laparo
blood - hemo, hemato
brain - encephalo
bronchial tube - broncho
coccyx - coccygo
colon - colo, colono
ear - auro, oto
esophagus - esophago
fallopian tube - salpingo
flesh - sarco
gallbladder - cholecysto
groin - inguino
liver - hepato
loin - lumbo
lungs - pneumo, pneumono, pulmono
membranes around the brain and spinal cord - meningo
mind - psycho, phreno
nose - naso, rhino
ovary - oophoro, ovario
pelvis - pelvo
ribs - costo
sac of fluid surrounding the embryo - amnio
shoulder blade - scapulo
skin or surface tissue - demo, epithelio
skull - cranio
underarm - axillo
uterus - hystero, metro, metrio, utero
windpipe - tracheo
wrist bones - carop
breast - mammo, masto



carino- cancer
thrombo- clotting
cry- cold
chem- drug
opthalm- eye
cephal- head
cardio- heart
nephr- kidney
ren- kidney
gnos- knowledge
neuro- nerves
erythro- red
chron- time
onc- tumor
cyst- urinary bladder
leuk- white
trans- through or across
post- after or behind
nat- birth
meta- change
dia- complete
troph- development or nourishment
hyper- excessive
tachy- fast
plas- formation, growth, or development
aden- glads
hemi- half
poly- many
neo- new
a- not
an- not
ec- outside
exo- outside
aut- self
later- side
brady- side
peri- surrounding
isch- to hold back
ad- toward or near
ana- up or apart
con- with
endo- within
intra- within
vasul- blood vessel
arthr- joint
ather- plaque
phleb- vein
ateri- artery
chondro- cartilage
necr- death
path- disease
my- muscle
son- sound
glyc- sugar
lapar- abdomen
hem- blood
hemat- blood
encephal- brain
bronch- bronchial tubes
coccyg- coccyx
col- colon
ot- ear
esophag- esophagus
salping- fallopian tubes
sarc- flesh
cholecyst- gallbladder
inguin- groin
hepat- liver
lumb- loin
mening- meninges
psych- mind
rhin- nose
oophor- ovary
pelv- pelvis
cost- ribs
amni- amnion
scapul- shoulder blades
epitheli- skin or surface tissue
cutane- skin
crani- skull
axil- armpit
hyster- uterus
trache- windpipe
carp- wrist bones
mamm- breast
mast- breast
pneumon- lung
pulmon- lung


binding or surgical fixation - desis
cell - cyte
dilation or expansion - ectasia, ectasis
displacement - ectopia
irrigation or washing - clysis
one who - er
to run - drome
to separate - crit
vomit - emesis
abnormal condition - osis, iasis
birth - partum
blood condition - emia
breathing - pnea
condition - ia, ism
cutting out - ectomy
death - mortem
enlargement - megaly
formation - plasm
hardening - sclerosis
inflammation - itis
opening - stomy
pain - algia
pertaining to - al, ic, ar, ary
pressure - tension
process of cutting into - tomy
process of visual examination - scopy
protein - globin
record - gram
separation, breakdown, or destruction - lysis
specialist - logist
state of - sis
study of - logy
to eat or swallow - phagia
to fall or slide - lapse
to send - mission
to speak - phasia
to stand, place, stop, or control - stasis
to view - opsy
tumor or mass - oma
surgical procedure to remove fluid - centesis
an instrument to visually examine - scope
surgical repair or correction - plasty


-desis : surgical fixation
-cyte : cell
-ectasis: dilation or expansion
-ectopia: dilation or expansion
-clysis: washing
-er: one who
-drome: to run
-crit: to separate
-emesis: vomit
-osis: abnormal condition
-iasis: abnormal condition
-partum: birth
-emia: blood condition
-pnea: breathing
-ia: condition
-ism: condition
-ectomy: uctting out
-mortem: death
-megaly: enlargement
-plasm: formation
-sclerosis: hardening
-itis: inflammation
-stomy: opening
-algia: pain
-al: pertaining to
-ic: pertaining to
-ar: pertaining to
-ary: pertaining to
-tension: pressure
-tomy: process of cutting into
-scopy: process of visual examination
-globin: protein
-gram: record
-lysis: separation, breakdown, or destruction
-logist: specialist
-sis: state of
-logy: study of
-phagia: to eat or swallow
-lapse: to fall or slide
-misison: to send
phasia: to speak
-statis: to stand, place, stop, or control
-opsy: to view
-oma: tumor or mass
-centesis: surgical procedure to remove fluid
-scope: instrument to visually examine
-plasty: surgical repair or correction



elevated levels of this antigen are associated with prostatic enlargement and
prostate cancer: prostate-specific antigen

what body system is composed of glands and sends chemical messengers called
hormones into the blood to act on other glads and organs: endocrine system

what body system plays a central role in immunity: lymphatic system

what condition results when the tissue from the inner lining of the uterus
occurs abnormally in other pelvic or abdominal locations? endometriosis

what condition, caused by the presence of an extra chromosome being present in
all cells of the body, is characterized by mental retardation, flat face with
short nose, slated eyes, broad hands and feet, stubby fingers, and a protruding
lower lip? down's syndrome

what condition, caused by the compression of the nerve leading to the hand, is
characterized by symptoms including pain, tingling, burning, and numbness of the
hand? carpal tunnel syndrome

what disease has the symptom of polyuria and polydipsia? central diabetes
insipidus

what disease is characterized by exopthalmos, tachycardia, restlessness,
insomnia, weight loss, and enlarged thyroid gland? Graves' disease

what disease is characterized by the destruction of the myelin sheath on nerve
cells in the central nervous system with replacement by plaques of sclerotic
tissue? multiple sclerosis

what do high levels of Bence Jones protein in the urine and serum indicate?
multiple myeloma

what does the hemoccult test screen for? colorectal cancer

what glands are found on the back side of the thyroid gland? parathyroid gland

what hormone is measured in either the blood or urine to indicate pregnancy?
human chorionic gonadotropin

what hormone is produced by the parathyroid glands? parathyroid hormone

what hormone is produced by the testes? testosterone

what hormone is produced by the thyroid gland? thyroid hormone

what imaging technique creates images of the body using magnetic waves? magnetic
resonance imaging

what is the flap of cartilage that closes over the trachea during swallowing so
that food travels down the esophagus called? epiglottis

what is the major hormone produced by the pancreas? insulin

what is the medical term for a blood clot? thrombus

what is the medical term for a heart attack? myocardial infarction

what is the medical term for a mass or swelling containing blood? hematoma

what is the medical term for a stroke? cerebrovascular accident

what is the medical term for high blood pressure? hypertension

what is the medical term for nerve pain? neuralgia

what is the medical term for the disease of heart muscle? cardiomyopathy

what is the name of the battery-powered device that delivers stimulation to
nerves to relieve acute and chronic pain? TENS

What is the name of the condition in which an extreme decrease in the amount of
oxygen in the body with increase of carbon dioxide leads to loss of
consciousness or death? asphyxiation

what is the name of the condition in which an individual is unable to speak?
aphasia

what is the name of the condition in which bone marrow fails to produce red
blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets? aplastic anemia

what is the name of the condition in which erythrocytes assume an abnormal
crescent or sickle shape, causing the cells to clump together and create clots
that block blood vessels? sickle cell anemia

what is the name of the condition in which low or absent iron levels lead to low
hemoglobin concentration or deficiency of red blood cells? iron deficiency
anemia

what is the name of the condition in which one side of the body is paralyzed?
hemiplegia

what is the name of the condition in which red blood cells are destroyed and
bone marrow cannot compensate for their loss? hemolytic anemia

what is the name of the condition in which the mucous membrane of the stomach
fails to produce a factor (intrinsic factor) that is necessary for the
absorption of vitamin b-12 and the proper function of red blood cells?
pernicious anemia

what is the name of the condition in which the spasm and narrowing of bronchi
leads to bronchial airway obstruction? asthma

what is the name of the condition in which there is a lower than normal number
of red blood cells or a decrease in hemoglobin in cells? anemia

what is the name of the condition that involves a non-cancerous enlargement of
the prostate gland? benign prostatic hyperplasia

what is the name of the condition that some women experience after given birth,
with symptoms including moodiness and sad feelings? postpartum depression

what is the name of the device worn by patients 24 hours per day that detects
abnormal heart rhythms? holter monitor

what is the name of the entire chest cavity, containing the lungs, heart,
trachea, esophagus, and bronchial tubes? thoracic cavity

what is the name of the glands that sit on top of the kidneys? adrenal glands

what is the name of the large space between the lungs? mediastinum

what is the name of the membrane that surrounds each lung? pleura

what is the name of the procedure in which a machine is used to filter wastes
from the blood? hemodialysis

what is the name of the procedure in which amniotic fluid is removed for
testing? amniocentesis

what is the name of the procedure in which fluid is injected into the abdominal
cavity and then withdrawn (containing waste material)? abdominocentesis

what is the name of the procedure in which one or both ovaries are removed?
oophorectomy

what is the name of the procedure in which pieces of the prostate gland are
removed through the urethra to relieve benign prostatic hypertrophy?
transurethral resection of the prostate

what is the name of the procedure in which the fallopian tube or tubes are
removed? salpingectomy

what is the name of the procedure in which the gallbladder is removed?
cholecystectomy

what is the name of the procedure in which the stomach is stapled and reduced to
the size of a small pouch, and then the jejunum is connected with the smaller
stomach? gastric bypass surgery

what is the name of the procedure that measures the blood flow in vessels via
sound waves? doppler ultrasound

what is the name of the procedure that opens the windpipe to the outside of the
body? tracheotomy

what is the name of the procedure that records brain wave activity?
electroencephalogram

what is the name of the protein in erythrocytes that helps carry oxygen in the
blood? hemoglobin

what is the name of the region that lies above the stomach? epigastric

what is the name of the small cells that help blood to clot? platelets

what is the name of the syndrome associated with excess secretion of cortisol
from the adrenal cortex, and characterize by symptoms of obesity, moon-like
fullness of the face, hyperglycemia, and osteoporosis? cushing's syndrome

what is the name of the valve that separates the left atrium and left ventricle?
mitral valve

what is the name of the valve that separates the right atrium and right
ventricle? tricuspid valve

what is the part of the brain that controls muscular coordination and balance?
cerebellum

what is the part of the brain that controls body movements, thought, reasoning,
vision, hearing, and speech? cerebrum

what is the study of disease? epidemiology

what is the study of joint diseases? rheumatology

what is the study of blood? hematology

what is the study of the endocrine glands? endocrinology

what is the study of the mind and mental disorders? psychology

what is the study of the nerves, brain, and spinal cord? neurology

what is the study of the skin? dermatology

what is the study of the stomach and intestines? gastroenterology

what is the study of tumors? oncology

what is the study of women and women's disease? gynecology

what is the surgical repair of a blood vessel using a catheter, balloon and
stent? angioplasty

what is the term for the proteins made by white blood cells that fight
infection? antibodies

what is the term for a benign tumor of the uterus? uterine fibroids

What is the term for a brain disorder marked by deterioration of mental capacity
(dementia)? Alzheimer's disease

What is the term for a cancerous tumor of muscle? sarcoma

What is the term for a chronic brain disorder characterized by recurrent seizure
activity? epilepsy

What is the term for a chronic inflammatory disease of joints and connective
tissues that leads to the deformation of joints? arthritis

What is the term for a collapsed lung? pneumothorax

What is the term for a condition in which the extremities are enlarged dues to
the hypersecretion from the anterior portion of the pituitary gland after
puberty? acromegaly

What is the term for a condition of deficient blood sugar? hypoglycemia

What is the term for a condition of excessive blood sugar? hyperglycemia

What is the term for a disease of many nerves? polyneuropathy

What is the term for an increase in the number of leukocytes in the blood?
leukocytosis

What is the term for a lack of menstrual flow? amenorrhea

What is the term for a local widening of an artery caused by weakness in the
arterial wall or breakdown of the wall from atherosclerosis? aneurysm

What is the term for a malignant brain tumor arising from glial cells? gliomas

What is the term for a malignant tumor of bone marrow cells? multiple myeloma

What is the term for a malignant tumor of pigmented cells in the skin? melanoma

What is the term for a malignant tumor of pleural cells? mesothelioma

What is the term for a malignant tumor of the liver? hepatocellular carcinoma

What is the term for a malignant tumor of the lymph nodes? lymphoma

What is the term for a malignant tumor of the testis? germ cell tumor

What is the term for a malignant tumor of the thymus gland? thymoma

What is the term for a mass of blood above the membrane surrounding the brain?
subdural hematoma

What is the term for a new growth, malignant or benign? neoplasia

What is the term for a non-cancerous tumor of muscle?  leiomyoma

What is the term for a pigmented lesion in or one the skin (i.e., a mole)? nevus

What is the term for a pregnancy that is out of place (usually in the fallopian
tube)? ectopic pregnancy

What is the term for a red blood cell?  Erythrocyte

What is the term for a slightly elevated number of white blood cells in the body
due to an infection? leukocytosis

What is the term for a surgical puncture to remove fluid from the chest?
thoracentesis

What is the term for a tumor or mass of a gland? adenoma

What is the term for a white blood cell?  leukocyte

What is the term for abnormal growth of bone marrow cells? myeloma

What is the term for abnormal noise (ringing buzzing, roaring) sound in the
ears? tinnitus

What is the term for abnormal protrusion of the eyes (a symptom associated with
Graves disease or hyperthyroidism)? proptosis

What is the term for an abnormal condition of the death of cells? necrosis

What is the term for an abnormal heartbeat (rhythm)? arrhythmia

What is the term for an acute infectious disease with enlargement of lymph nodes
and increased numbers of lymphocytes and monocytes in the bloodstream?
mononucleosis

What is the term for an anastomosis between the stomach and second part of the
small intestine created during gastric bypass surgery? anastomotic stenosis

What is the term for an artificial limb? prosthesis

What is the term for an enlarged liver?  hepatomegaly

What is the term for an illness that is produced unexpectedly by a treatment?
latrogenic

What is the term for an increase in pressure within the chamber at the front of
the eye? glaucoma

What is the term for an infection acquired during hospitalization? nosocomial
infections

What is the term for an infectious disease caused by bacteria, characterized by
symptoms of cough, weight loss, night sweats, hemoptysis, and pleuritic pain?
tuberculosis

What is the term for an inherited disorder characterized by progressive weakness
and degeneration of muscle fibers? muscular dystrophy

What is the term for an irregularity present at birth? congential anomaly

What is the term for an oil producing gland in the skin? sabaceous gland

What is the term for any problem that affects the fetus within the womb? birth
defects

What is the term for bacteria in the blood> bacteremia

What is the term for blood in the pleural cavity? hemothorax

What is the term for cancer of bone? osteosarcoma

What is the term for cancer of cartilage tissue? chondrosarcoma

What is the term for cancer of fatty tissue? liposarcoma

What is the term for cancer of fibrous tissue? sarcoma

What is the term for cancer of skeletal muscle? rhabdomyosarcoma

What is the term for cancer of visceral muscle? leiomyosarcoma

What is the term for chest pain caused by decreased blood flow to heart muscle?
angina

What is the term for chronic, progressive arthritis with stiffening of joints,
primarily of the spine and hip? ankylosing spondylitis

What is the term for clouding of the lens of the eye, causing impairment of
vision or blindness? cataract

What is the term for difficulty swallowing? dysphagia

What is the term for enlarged, swollen veins near a testicle? varicocele

What is the term for enlargement of the heart? cardiomegaly

What is the term for excessive bleeding during menstruation? menorrhagia

What is the term for fainting or sudden and temporary loss of consciousness as a
result of inadequate flow of blood to the brain? syncope

What is the term for foreign substances that stimulate white blood cells to
produce antibodies (in normally functioning immune systems)? antigen

What is the term for groups of symptoms or signs of illness that occur together?
syndrome

What is the term for hardening of the arteries? artherosclerosis

What is the term for having more than five fingers on one hand? polydactyly

What is the term for high blood pressure with no apparent cause? primary
hypertension

What is the term for holding back blood from an organ? ischemia

What is the term for increased thirst? polydipsia

What is the term for increased urination? polyuria

what is the term for inflammation of a vein with formation of clots?
thombrophlebitis

What is the term for inflammation of bone and bone marrow? osteomyelitis

What is the term for inflammation of joints caused by excessive uric acid? gout

What is the term for inflammation of the ear?  otitis

What is the term for inflammation of the epiglottis? epiglottitis

What is the term for inflammation of the inner lining of the heart? endocarditis

What is the term for inflammation of the kidney? nephritis

What is the term for inflammation of the liver? hepatitis

What is the term for inflammation of the muscle? myositis

What is the term for inflammation of the nose? rhinitis

What is the term for inflammation of the skin? dermatitis

What is the term for inflammation of the soft tissue under the skin? phlegmon

What is the term for inflammation of the stomach? gastritis

What is the term for inflammation of the throat? pharygitis

What is the term for muscle pain? myalgia

What is the term for pain associated with menstrual flow? dysmenorrhea

What is the term for painful breathing that may be cause by anxiety, strenuous
exercise, or certain heart conditions? dyspnea

What is the term for painful burning sensation upon urination? dysuria

What is the term for paralysis of all four limbs? quadriplegia

What is the term for rapid breathing? tachypneea

What is the term for recovery and disappearance of symptoms? remission

What is the term for removal or cutting out of an organ? excision

What is the term for spitting up blood? haemoptysis

What is the term for the abnormal condition of glucose in the urine? glycosuria

What is the term for the abnormal condition of no urine production? anuria

What is the term for the abnormal condition of protein in the urine? proteinuria

What is the term for the abnormal condition of small pouches or sacs in the wall
of the intestine? diverticulosis

What is the term for the abnormal condition of stones in the kidneys?
nephrolithiasis

What is the term for the absence of hair from areas where it normally grows?
hypotrichosis

What is the term for the area between the chest and hip? abdomen

What is the term for the bones located beyond the carpals (between the carpals
and phalanges)? metacarpal

What is the term for the complete knowledge gained after testing and examining
the patient? diagnosis

What is the term for the condition characterizes by paleness of skin, weak and
rapid pulse, and shallow breathing, that indicates a poor oxygen supply to
tissues and insufficient return of blood to the heart? hypovolemic shock

What is the term for the condition in which hyperinflation of air sacs with
destruction of alveolar walls? emphysema

What is the term for the condition in which the skin and other tissues have a
yellow-orange color, and there are high levels of bilirubin in the bloodstream?
jaundice

What is the term for the condition of undescended testes? cryptorchidism

What is the term for the decrease in bone density with thinning and weakening of
bone? osteoporosis

What is the term for the disease that involves the backflow of the contents of
the stomach into the esophagus? gastroesophageal reflux disease

What is the term for the disorder of the pancreas that causes an increase in
blood glucose levels, involves some insulin deficiency and resistance of tissues
to the action of insulin, and usually presents during adulthood? type 2 diabetes

What is the term for the disorder of the pancreas that causes an increase in
blood glucose levels, involves the complete deficiency of insulin in the body,
and usually presents during childhood? type 1 diabetes

What is the term for the disorder of the pancreas that causes an increase in
blood glucose levels? hyperglycemia

What is the term for the enlargement of the thyroid gland? goiter

What is the term for the examination of the prostate gland with finger palpation
through the rectum? digital rectum exam

What is the term for the excessive secretion of hormone from a gland in front of
the trachea in the neck? hyperthyroidism

What is the term for the excision of a piece of backbone to relieve pressure on
nerves from a herniating disk? laminectomy

What is the term for the excision of lung tissue? pneumonectomy

What is the term for the excision or resection of a kidney? nephrectomy

What is the term for the glands that secrete hormones within the body? endocrine
glands

What is the term for the inability of the heart to pump its required amount of
blood, leading to the accumulation of blood in the lungs? congestive heart
failure

What is the term for the incision of a vein? venotomy

What is the term for the inflammation of a joint? arthritis

What is the term for the inflammation or infection within the diverticula?
diverticulitis

What is the term for the inflammatory disease in which small nodules, or
tubercles, form in lymph nodes and other organs? sarcoidosis

What is the term for the loss of movement in any part of the body caused by a
break in the connection between the nerve and muscle? paralysis

What is the term for the lower portion of the uterus? cervix

What is the term for the measurement of the rate at which red blood cells fall
to the bottom of a test tube? (A high rate is associated with inflammatory
diseases like rheumatoid arthritis) the sedimentation rate

What is the term for the membrane surrounding the abdominal organs? peritoneum

What is the term for the muscles that lie between the ribs? intercostals

What is the term for the outer layer of skin? epidermis

What is the term for the partial removal of the stomach? partial gastrectomy

What is the term for the procedure in which a physician inserts a wooden spatula
or cotton swab to take secretions from the cervix and vagina? pap smear

What is the term for the procedure in which a tube is placed through the nose or
mouth into the trachea to establish an airway during surgery and for placement
on a respirator? endotracheal intubation

What is the term for the procedure in which the innermost lining of an artery is
surgically removed to remove fatty deposits and clots? endarterectomy

What is the term for the procedure in which vessels are taken from a patient’s
legs or chest and are connected to coronary arteries to make detours around
blockages? coronary artery bypass surgery

What is the term for the procedure of withdrawing fluid from a cavity or sac?
paracentesis

What is the term for the process in which cells increase in size (but not in
number)? hypertrophy

What is the term for the process of removing living tissue and viewing it under
a microscope?  biopsy

What is the term for the return of disease symptoms? relapse

What is the term for the space below the abdominal cavity, containing the
urinary bladder?  pelvic cavity

What is the term for the space within the backbones containing the spinal cord?
spinal cavity

What is the term for the space within the skull, containing the brain? cranial
cavity

What is the term for the spread of a cancerous tumor from its original place to
a secondary location in the body? metastasis

What is the term for the study of the heart? cardiology

What is the term for the surgical correction of the nose? rhinoplasty

What is the term for the surgical fixation of an undescended testicle in a young
male infant? orchidopexy

What is the term for the test that shows the structure of organs using sound
waves beyond the normal range of hearing? ultrasonography

What is the term for the treatment of a cardiac arrhythmia by sending brief
discharges of electricity across the chest?  cardioversion

What is the term for the white outer part of the eyeball? sclera

What is the term for the widening of the opening of the cervix and scraping of
the lining of the uterus to remove tissue and stop prolonged or heavy bleeding?
dialation and curettage

What is the term that means pertaining to the head? cephalic

What is the test in which a sample of plasma is tested for the presence of
antibodies found in patients with systemic lupus erythematosis? antinuclear
antibody test

What large organ can be found in the right upper quadrant? liver

What medical speciality deals with the treatment and management of pain and
symptom relief, with emotional support for terminally ill patients?  pallative
care

What medical specialty treats eye disorders, both surgically and medically?
opthalmologist

What medical specialty treats kidney disorders? nephrology

What muscle separates the abdominal and thoracic cavities? diaphragm

What plane of the body divides the body into upper and lower portions? axial
(transverse) plane

What plane of the body divides the body or an organ into front (anterior) and
back (posterior)? coronal (frontal) plane

What plane of the body divides the body or an organ into right and left sides?
saggital (lateral) plane

What procedure is used to remove cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for analysis? lumbar
puncture

What procedure is used to remove skin lesions, such as warts, with liquid
nitrogen or carbon dioxide snow? cryosurgery

What procedure is used to treat a ligament tear of the patella? surgical
patellar tendon repair

What procedure is used to treat an ovarian cyst? laparoscopy

What procedure is used to treat coronary arteriosclerosis? angioplasty

What procedure is used to treat pleural effusion? thoracentesis

What procedure is used to treat renal failure? hemodialysis

What procedure is used to treat uterine adenocarcinoma? hysterectomy

What procedure would you use to diagnose epilepsy? electroencephalogram

What procedure would you use to diagnose leukemia? bone marrow biopsy

What procedure would you use to diagnose urinary bladder carcinoma? cystoscopy

What procedure would you use to treat renal cell carcinoma? radical nephrectomy

What quadrant is the spleen located in? upper left quadrant

What syndrome is characterized by symptoms including chest pain, dyspnea,
fatigue, and abnormal heart sounds (murmurs) heard on physical exam? myocardial
infarction

What syndrome, caused by a virus that damages lymphocytes, is characterized by
symptoms including sever infections, malignancy (Kaposi sarcoma and lymphoma),
fever, malaise, and gastrointestinal disturbances? HIV

What syndrome, caused by bacterial infection in the vagina, is characterized by
symptoms including high fever, vomiting, diarrhea, rash, hypotension, and
shock? toxic shock syndrome

What term mean's "sharp", "sudden" or "brief"? acute

What term means "pertaining to the diaphragm"? diapragmatic

What term means "pertaining to time"? chronic

What term refers to having blood in the urine? hematuria

What test is used to measure ventilation of the lungs using a spirometer?
spirometry

What test measures the amount of urea in the blood? blood urea nitrogen test

What type of doctor administers agents for the loss of sensation?
anesthesiologist

What type of doctor diagnoses and treats malignant and benign tumors? oncologist

What type of doctor diagnoses disease by analysis of cells? pathologist

What type of doctor interprets x-rays, MRIs, and ultrasound images? radiologist

What type of doctor performs surgery on bones, muscles, and joints? orthopedic
surgeons

What type of doctor performs surgery on chest organs? cardiothoracic surgeon

What type of doctor performs surgery on the brain, spinal cord, and nerves?
neurosurgeon

What type of doctor performs surgery on the heart and blood vessels?
cardiovascular surgeon

What type of doctor performs surgery on the urinary tract? urologist

What type of doctor provides comprehensive care to adults in an office or
hospital? primary care physician

What type of doctor treat joint and muscle disorders? rheumatologist

What type of doctor treats blood disorders? hematologists

What type of doctor treats disease caused by microorganisms? infectious disease
doctor

What type of doctor treats disease with high-energy radiation? radiation
oncologist

What type of doctor treats diseases of children? pediatrician

What type of doctor treats diseases of old age? geriatricians

What type of doctor treats ears, noses, and throats? otolarngologist

What type of doctor treats eye disorders, both surgically and medically?
Ophthalmologist

What type of doctor treats heart disease? cardiologist

What type of doctor treats lung diseases? pulmonologist

What type of doctor treats mental disorders? psychiatrist

What type of doctor treats nerve disorders? neurologist

What type of doctor treats patients to restore function after illness?
physiatrist

What type of doctor treats pregnant women and delivers babies? obstetrician

What type of doctor treats skin disorders? dermatologist

What type of doctor treats stomach and intestinal disorders? gastroenterologist

What types of viruses give rise to tumors? ebv, hbv, hiv, hcv, hhv, hpv, htlv-g1
