###### Abstract 
###### Equipoise or Evidentialism: Ethics of Uncertainty in RCTs

In clinical research, the principle of clinical equipoise is significant for
providing the moral framework upon which randomized clinical trials are deemed
to be permissible or not.  It is presumed that a clinician has a fiduciary
responsibility to use their judgment in serving the patient's best interests.
This is held in tension with the execution of a randomized clinical trial which
are typically conducted by trained clinicians.  After all, in randomization, the
decision regarding course of treatment for the participant is taken out of the
domain of the of domain of the clinician's judgment and into the whims of
chance.  Moreover, in the best case scenario for the research, a randomized
control entails that, if one course of treatment was more effective than the
alternatives, some portion of the participants were not given the best
intervention available.  This poses ethical concerns.  After all, the moral
wrong in the Tuskegee experiments was the intentional withholding of an
available and effective treatment for syphilis.  Clinical equipoise attempts to
resolve these concerns by stipulating that trials must be conducted from a
certain epistemic state where the options evaluated are of equal weight.
It is argued that it is wrong to hold a trial if the researchers
already know the best treatment since this would, presumably, involve
intentionally withholding it to some.  However, in a state of equipoise,
researchers are absolved since it cannot be intentional withholding because, in
giving all options equal weightiness, they do not know.  An issue arises for
clinical equipoise in that it is typically framed as a subjective state of an
individual clinician's psychology or the consensus of the medical community.
Because of this, I will argue that clinical equipoise is inadequate because it
is epistemologically misguided and, as a result, morally irrelevant.  In its
place, if we are concerned with the moral permissibility of randomized clinical
trials, then we ought to instead be committed to evidentialism, at the very
least, in the case of medicine due to the high stakes involved when medical
authorities assert to "know" To this end, I sketch out how evidentialism
suggests two considerations that hold that clinical trials are not only
permissible but morally and epistemically virtuous.  Given the state of
objective uncertainty regarding safety and efficacy prior to trials, we are
moved to attempt to minimize that uncertainty by conducting trials in order to,
firstly, instantiate the necessary epistemic ground for trust in the
clinician-patient relationship and, secondly, respect the moral responsibilities
we have as authorities within a shared epistemic community.
