=Compost=

Ideas
- overwork?
  - Dignity? Social bases of self-respect, existentialist, capabilities
  - Leisure
  - Josef Pieper's Leisure, the Basis of Culture
  - Obvious harms, but how to show that there is a wrong?

- immortality?
  - resources question aside, is it an intrinsic good?
  - Bernard Williams - The Makropulos case
  - Upload consciousnesses, Bishop and Erberl
 
- biohacking?
- loneliness
- euthanizing the nonterminal

Overwork/burnout

996 culture. Multiple jobs. Loans, childcare. Work insecurity. Voluntary
overwork. Closed possibility space.
Lack of self-awareness but easily recognized

Responsibility/culpability? Working day, employers, public health, social
welfare to obviate issue (come at problem from both ends) 

Moral grounding? Well-being, capability (leisure) voluntary overwork contra to
principalist value of autonomy? But how to avoid objectionable paternalism?

That too much work is problematic shouldn't be controversial. Fight for the 8
hour working day. But rationale of the Dickensian workhouse, work is ethic.
There is a moral and public health need to revisit. WHO study of overwork
deaths. Burnout. Opportunity costs as a result of loss of leisure. A right to
turn off. A room of one's own. However, charge to implement over and beyond
labor regulations? Infringement on autonomy? But are the majority of those who
choose to work excessively doing so with the reasonable capability of doing
otherwise or not? If not, is it truly an expression of autonomy?

Moral outrage at a market of self interested rational agents that decided they
were not willing to pay to costs of increased health risks and emotional labor
for the same benefit and instead opted to lower their costs for better benefits.

narrow down to health care workers
    puzzle about how to address pandemic needs: overworked but responsibility to
    respond.
        short-term obligations and long-term obligations
        short term largely a moral responsibility to ending pandemic
