== Josef Pieper ==
== Leisure, the Basis of Culture ==

= I =  
  
pp. 4
Of course, the original meaning of the concept of "leisure" has practically been
forgotten in today's leisure-less culture of "total work": in order to win our
way to a real understanding of leisure, we must confront the contradiction that
rises from our overemphasis on the world of work. "One does not only work in
order to live, but one lives for the sake of one's work," this statement, quoted
by Max Weber, makes immediate sense to us, and appeals to current opinion. It is
difficult for us to see how in fact it turns the order of things upside down.

- Max Weber, _The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism_

pp.4
"We work in order to be at leisure." Would we hesitate to say that here there
world is really turned upside-down? Doesn't this statement appear almost
_immoral_ to the man or woman of the world of "total work"? Is it not an attack
on the basic principles of human society?

- Aristotle, _Nichomachean Ethics_ X, 7 (1177b 4-6)
- Aristotle, _Politics_ (stating that the "pivot" around which everything turns
  is leisure) VIII 3 (1337b3)
  
pp. 6
The real reason for mentioning it was to show how sharply the modern valuation
of work and leisure differs from that of Antiquity and the Middle Ages.

pp. 6
Now, the very fact of this difference, of our inability to recover the original
meanings of "leisure," will strike us all the more when we realize how
extensively the opposing idea of "work" has invaded and taken over the whole
realm of human action and of human existence as a whole; when we realize, as
well, how ready we are to grant all claims made for the person who "works".

pp. 6
"Worker" will be used in an anthropological sense: as a general human ideal. It
is with this meaning in mind that Ernst Niekisch spoke of the "worker" as an
"imperial figure" and Ernst Jünger sketched a portrait of that "worker"-type
which has already begun to determine the future of humanity.

- Ernst Niekisch, Die dritte imperiale Figur (Berlin, 1935)
- Ernst Jünger, Der Arbeiter. Herrschaft und Gestalt (Hamburg, 1932)

pp. 7
An altered conception of the human being _as such_, and a new interpretation of
the meaning of the human existence _as such_, looms behind the new claims being
made for "work" and the "worker".

pp. 7
If something of real import is going to be said on the matter, it will be
achieved not by reconstructing a historical narrative, but by digging more
deeply to the very roots of a philosophical and theological understanding of a
human person.

= II =

pp. 8
For in fully explicating the inner structure of the concept "intellectual work,"
we come face to face with the "world of total work" and its real meaning.

pp. 10
It is no wonders, that, starting from this basis, Kant was able to conclude that
all knowing, even philosophy itself (since philosophy is at the greatest remove
from sense perception), should be understood as a form of _work_.

pp. 13
For the ancient and medieval philosophers the "laboring" nature of the human
_ratio_ was likewise a mark of its humanness. The operation of the _ratio_, its
discursive thinking process, really is work, and a difficult activity.

pp. 13
The statement, "knowing is work," or "knowing is an activity," is a statement
with two sides to it. It implies a demand _on_ the human being, and a demand
_made_ by the human being.

pp. 13
The, other, hidden, side of the same dictum - the side that does not immediately
show itself - is the claim _made by_ man: if knowing is work, exclusively work,
then the one who knows, knows only the fruit of his own, subjective activity,
and nothing else. There is nothing in his knowing that is not the fruit of his
own efforts; there is nothing "received" in it.

pp. 15
For, in this laborious aspect, he saw a kind of legitimation of philosophy:
philosophy is genuine, _insofar_ as it is a "Herculean labor." The fact that
"intellective vision" didn't _cost anything_ is what made it so suspicious to
him. Kant expected no real gain in knowledge from intellectual vision, _because_
it is the very nature of vision to be effortless.

pp. 16
So, effort is good. This was a thought formulated long ago by the Cynic
philosopher Antisthenes.

pp. 16
Thomas Carlyle, the prophet of the religion of Work.

pp. 17
"Effort is good": objecting to this thesis in the _Summa theologiae_, Thomas
Aquinas wrote as follows: "The essence of virtue consists more in the Good than
in the Difficult."
    Summa theologiae II-II, Q. 123, a12 ad 2am
    
pp. 24
But this is not to say anything against professional training, or against the
functionary. Of course, the vocationally specialized exercise of a function is
_the_ normal form of human activity; what is normal is work, and the normal day
is a working day. But the question is this: can the world of man be exhausted in
being the "working world"? Can the human being be satisfied with being a
functionary, a "worker"? Can human existence be fulfilled in being exclusively a
work-a-day existence? Or, to put it another way, from the other direction, as it
were: Are there such things as liberal arts?

= III =

pp. 27
Our brief sketch of the "Worker" type has brought into the open three principal
characteristics: an outwardly directed, active power; an aimless readiness to
suffer pain; an untiring insertion into the rationalized program of social
organization. From the perspective of such a "worker," leisure can only appear
as something totally unforeseen, something completely alien, without rhyme or
reason - as a synonym, in fact, for idleness and laziness.

pp. 27
[code of life of high middle ages] There is a curious connection in the fact
that the restlessness of a self-destructive work-fanaticism should take to rise
from the absence of a will to accomplish something.

pp. 28
Idleness, for the older code of behaviour, meant especially this: that the human
being had given up on the very responsibility that comes with his dignity: that
he does not want to be what God wants him to be, and that means that he does not
want to be what he really, and in the ultimate sense, _is_.

pp. 29
The opposite of _acedia_ [idleness] is not the industrious spirit of the daily
effort to make a living but rather the cheerful affirmation by man of his own
existence, of the world as a whole, and of God - of Love, that is, from which
arises that special freshness of action, which would never be confused by anyone
with any experience with the narrow activity of the "workaholic"

pp. 30
Idleness in the old sense, then, has so little in common with leisure, that it
is the very inner disposition to non-leisure that it is really "lack of
leisure." There can only be leisure when man is at one with himself, when he is
in accord with his own being... Idleness and lack of leisure belong with each
other: leisure is opposed to _both_.

pp. 30
...since leisure is not necessarily present in all the external things like
"breaks," "time off," "weekend," "vacation," and so on - it is a condition of
the soul...

pp. 31
Against the exclusiveness of the paradigm of work as _activity_, first of all,
there is leisure as "non-activity" - an inner absence of preoccupations, a calm,
an ability to let things go, to be quiet.

pp. 33
Second, against the exclusiveness of the paradigm of workers effort, leisure is
the condition of considering things in a celebrating spirit... Leisure is only
possible in the assumption that man is not only in harmony with himself..., but
also that he is in agreement with the world and its meaning.

pp. 33
... the leisure of man includes within itself a celebratory, approving,
lingering gaze of the inner eye on the reality of creation.

pp. 34 
In the third place, leisure stands opposed to the exclusiveness of the
paradigm of work as a social function.

pp. 34 
The "break" is there for the sake of work. It is supposed to provide "new
strength" for "new work," as the word "refreshment" indicates: one is refreshed
_for_ work through being refresh _from_ work.

pp. 35
Leisure is not justified in making the functionary as "trouble-free" in
operation as possible, with minimum "downtime," but rather in keeping the
functionary _human_... and this means that the human being does not disappear
into the parceled-out world of his limited work-a-day function, but instead
remains capable of taking in the world as a whole, and thereby to realize
himself as a being who is oriented toward the whole of existence.

pp. 35
This is why the ability to be "at leisure" is one of the basic powers of the
human soul.
