###Changes

I thank the reviewers for their helpful comments. I especially appreciate the
distinction between trust and trustworthiness which I incorporated the paper.
This also helped lead me to draw parallel to the ship owner and the
epistemically lucky clinician which I think is the biggest substantive change in
the paper.
Additionally, the comments regarding the gesture at evidentialist framework
rather than an explanation were taken on board. This resulted in a redrafting of
the final section to make that more explicit. The comments regarding the introduction were taken on board and the introduction
was reworked to hopefully make clearer the structure of the argument. To this
end, a more explicit thesis and sections were added. Comments largely asked for
clarification, so where appropriate the argument was made more explicit.
Comments questioning the exegesis of equipoise were left alone, since this is my
target. Questions regarding justification were helpful and hopefully handled in
explicitly laying out the scope of the paper. Similarly, it was somewhat unclear
to me where reviewers wanted to take the paper in terms of culpable ignorance.
However, I hopefully addressed that implicitly in the restructure of the final
section. Distinction between clinician and researcher was left out because the
distinction doesn't seem to pertain to this argument. To sum up, it seemed that
most of the comments were noting confusion and so most edits were made to
clarify where those issues came up. Substantively, I introduced the
trust/trustworthiness distinction suggested and a more explicit the scope
of the argument to deal with justification. Additional changes were made by me
because I realized what I actually wanted was "propositional attitudes" instead
of redundant "doxastic beliefs".
