==John Jacobs Teaching Lecture 8/20==

=1. Overview of Mentorship=

- Brown bag lunches for pedagogy and discussion about the required texts
- Teacher training (building a course)
- First course mentoring (first class, mentor for the course)
- Teacher observations
- Job market

=2. Overview of new core=


=3. How to be a TA=

Jacobs:
Large sessions poses issues. Breakout sessions are the place to get students
engaged with the material in discussion,

Ragland:
TA helps the prof help the students fall into the grip in the questions. In
philosophy the real power is in the questions. Mon, Wed lecture built to set up
Fri discussion. 

Beabout:
Have to go back to the big, basic problems. Part of the task is to create a
learning community. This has to be a community of friends. This in tension with
having to evaluate them.


=4. Brief intro of teaching your own course=


=General Notes=

When think-pair-share, assign expectations (set up at start that they will share
afterwards or assign someone to report).

Go first to set the bar for what to expect.

Powerful questions are open-ended and inviting. Students should not think you
are looking for a specific response. However they cannot be vague and amorphous.
They should clearly direct a line of thinking.

Clearly distinguish early on straight-forward questions and higher order
questions. First 20 minutes at least, basic comprehension questions. Don't lead
with hard questions. Build trust and warm them up.

Assign roles to have them make the best arguments of an assigned side so they're
not necessarily putting their own personal beliefs on the line.

Set expectations for how much feedback they should expect.
